DOC-941 K8s delete custom resources (#1819)
RedisLabs/redislabs-docs: content/kubernetes/re-clusters/delete_custom_resources.md

---
Title: Delete custom resources
linkTitle: Delete custom resources
description: This article explains how to delete Redis Enterprise clusters and Redis Enterprise databases from your Kubernetes environment.
weight: 90
alwaysopen: false
categories: ["Platforms"]
aliases: [
    /kubernetes/re-clusters/delete_custom_resources.md,
    /kubernetes/re-clusters/delete_custom_resources/,
]
---

## Delete a database

To delete a database managed by the Redis Enterprise Kubernetes operator, run `kubectl delete redb <your-db-name>` from your K8s cluster.

> When you delete a database, your data and the REDB custom resource file are also deleted.

Reviewer: This phrasing might confuse users to think that the actual redb.yaml file used to created the REDB is deleted too, which isn't the case. So, I'd avoid using "file" here and just say "the REDB custom resource are also deleted".

### Troubleshoot REDB deletion

> After a deletion request, the operator attaches a finalizer to the Redis Enterprise database (REDB) object. This makes sure the database is deleted before the REDB custom resource is removed from the K8s cluster.

Reviewer: The finalizer is typically attached upon the creation of the object, and not upon its deletion. It also doesn't ensure the underlying database is deleted, but merely enables it. Here's a possible rewording:
```suggestion
The operator attaches a finalizer to the Redis Enterprise Database (REDB) object which allows the underlying database to be deleted before the REDB custom resource is removed from the K8s cluster.
```

If the finalizer isn't removed automatically by the operator, you won't be able to delete your REDB resource.

> If this happens, you can remove the finalizer manually with the following command:

Reviewer: This is probably worthy of a note of caution, since if the finalizer hasn't been removed, there's no guarantee that the underlying database has been deleted, which might cause resource leaks and may require manual intervention.

```sh
kubectl patch redb <your-db-name> --type=json -p \
    '[{"op":"remove","path":"/metadata/finalizers","value":"finalizer.redisenterprisedatabases.app.redislabs.com"}]'
```

## Delete a Redis Enterprise cluster (REC)

To delete a Redis Enterprise cluster managed by the operator:

1. Delete all the databases in your cluster

> 1. Delete all the PVC's you created for the cluster.

Reviewer: I believe the PVCs deletion should take place only after the REC is successfully deleted, as it's still mounted to the REC nodes.

Also: I think that some PVCs are auto-created for the user in the case of RoF (@heinrich-redislabs or @yuvallevy2 can you confirm this?) and are not auto-deleted, so it could be useful to instruct the user how to locate them.

Author: @laurentdroin maybe you can help us figure out if the PVCs should be deleted before or after the REC?

Reviewer: Looked some more into this and also validated with @heinrich-redislabs. Here's the deal:
1. The PVCs _may_ be deleted before the REC is deleted. In this case, the PVCs will be "marked for deletion" but the  deletion will only take place after the consuming pods (the REC pods) are deleted ([source](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#storage-object-in-use-protection)).
2. Deleting the PVCs after the REC is deleted, will result in immediate deletion.
3. To keep the docs simple and straight forward, we should choose only one of these options. I think the 2nd option (after) is preferable since it spares the users from asking themselves "what happens to my PVCs if I delete them while in use".
4. Regardless, I think the instructions should let the user know he _may_ delete the PVCs, but may also choose to retain them for the purpose of future recovery/restoration (I'm not sure what's the right user-facing term in use).
5. Here's the command to delete the PVCs associated with a specific REC, if you like to include it:
```
kubectl delete pvc -l redis.io/cluster=<your-rec-name>
```

1. Run `kubectl delete rec <your-rec-name>` from your K8s cluster.

> When you delete your cluster, your data and the REC custom resource file are also deleted.

Reviewer: Ditto about "file".

### Troubleshoot REC deletion

> After a deletion request, the operator attaches a finalizer to the Redis Enterprise cluster (REC) object. This makes sure the Redis cluster is deleted before the REC custom resource is removed from the K8s cluster.

Reviewer: Ditto about the finalizer.

If the finalizer isn't removed automatically by the operator, you won't be able to delete your REC resource.

If this happens, you can remove the finalizer manually with the following command:

```sh
kubectl patch rec <your-rec-name> --type=json -p \
    '[{"op":"remove","path":"/metadata/finalizers","value":"redbfinalizer.redisenterpriseclusters.app.redislabs.com"}]'
```

## Delete the operator

> To delete the operator from your K8s cluster and namespace, you can delete the operator bundle with `kubectl delete bundle.yaml`. This will remove the operator and its custom resource definitions (CRDs) from your K8s cluster.

Reviewer: There's a `-f` missing in the deletion command:
```suggestion
To delete the operator from your K8s cluster and namespace, you can delete the operator bundle with `kubectl delete -f bundle.yaml`. This will remove the operator and its custom resource definitions (CRDs) from your K8s cluster.
```

> To delete the operator from your K8s cluster and namespace, you can delete the operator bundle with `kubectl delete bundle.yaml`. This will remove the operator and it's custom resource definitions (CRDs) from your K8s cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To delete the operator from your K8s cluster and namespace, you can delete the operator bundle with `kubectl delete bundle.yaml`. This will remove the operator and its custom resource definitions (CRDs) from your K8s cluster.
```

> {{<warning>}} The Redis Enterprise CRDs are non-namespaced resources, meaning they are shared across your entire K8s cluster. Deleting CRDs in one namespace, will delete custom resources in every other namespace across the K8s cluster.{{</warning>}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{<warning>}} The Redis Enterprise CRDs are non-namespaced resources, meaning they are shared across your entire K8s cluster. Deleting CRDs in one namespace will delete custom resources in every other namespace across the K8s cluster.{{</warning>}}
```

If you have Redis Enterprise clusters running in different namespaces on the same K8s cluster, deleting the entire operator bundle might cause data loss.

To safely delete the operator from one namespace without affecting the others, delete the operator files individually, excluding the CRD files:

```sh

> kubectl delete role.yaml
> kubectl delete role_binding.yaml
> kubectl delete service_account.yaml
> kubectl delete admission-service.yaml
> kubectl delete operator.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl delete -f role.yaml
kubectl delete -f role_binding.yaml
kubectl delete -f service_account.yaml
kubectl delete -f admission-service.yaml
kubectl delete -f operator.yaml
```
